---
layout: post
title:  "Chakras"
date:   July 26, 2019
---

Chakras are energy centres with the body.  Each chakra is associated with a part
of the physical body, but they lie within the subtle body.  The subtle body is
not the physical body; in place of the physical components of the body, the
subtle body is concerned with energy centres and energy flow.

Each chakra has an associated colour and element.  No chakra is inherently
positive or negative, but each may be either under or overly active.  When that
happens, it manifests as lacking or negative qualities.  The chakras are all
connected to each other, either supporting and drawing support in a system or
cutting off from and draining one another.  It is my belief that balancing them
will lead to a more fulfilled life.

There are many similarities between chakras and the planets of astrology.  It is
my view that there are universal common ground of understanding across cultures,
and that it is partially encoded in such systems.

## The 7 Chakras

### Root

The root chakra is all about survival.  Do you have the basic needs: food, water
shelter?  Beyond that, it is about security.  Do you know that you will have
these needs fulfilled tomorrow?  Are you grounded?

The element of the root chakra is Earth.  In asanas (yoga postures), the root
chakra through your connection to the ground.  This is emphasized in standing
postures, however it is present in all connections to the ground such as: the
sit bones in a seated posture, the base of the skull in corpse pose, through the
hands in inverted postures.  One may feel energy flowing down into the ground,
letting go of tension through that connection.  In activating one's limbs
against gravity, the body rises up.

One who has an under-active root chakra may seem removed from daily life, to
live in their own head, to be flighty.  One who has an overly active root chakra
may be too rigid in material matters, unable to be flexible.  As with the Earth
element in astrology, the perception of safety and security are far more
relevant than the objective material abundance.  Those who have suffered traumas
related to security may still feel materially insecure even when material
security has been achieved.  Similarly, if one is malnourished, the body may
take much longer to return to a normal metabolism.  The body retains the fear of
scarcity in nutrients.

### Sacral

The sacral chakra has to do with pleasure and sensation.  When eating, do you
really taste food?  Do you feel connected to the sensations of pleasure, or are
you just going through the motions?

The element of the sacral chakra is water.  Water soothes and cleanses.

When this chakra is over-active, one over indulges.  As necessary as it is to
enjoy sensation, it can be over done.  Similarly, it can be under-active.  The
soul needs pleasure and play to be healthy.

Physical movements that stimulate this chakra include dancing, especially
movements initiated in the hips.  Fluid, sensual movement activates the second
chakra.

### Solar Plexus

The solar plexus chakra is our drive.  Its element is fire.  It is what gives us
the will to make our mark in the world, our determination.

One with an under-active solar plexus may doubt themselves out of pursuing their
dreams, not having the confidence to start.  They may not speak up or stand up
for what the believe.  One with an over-active solar plexus chakra tends to use
their domination to subject others to their will.  A well balanced solar plexus
serves everyone well, but leaders especially need to temper their will between
driving what they believe in and leading with compassion rather than force.

Postures that activate the solar plexus include the warrior poses.  They require
the core to be highly engaged, a level headed focus, and breath.  To engage the
core while maintaining a clear mind is much like how a leader must act swiftly
and decisively while remaining calm.  A good warrior pose must engage muscles
without tensing up, just as good leadership guides their people without using an
iron rule.
 
### Heart

The heart chakra is our centre.  Its element is air.

When ones heart chakra is blocked it feels suffocating.  People can be smothered
by well intentioned loved ones.  When you make true connections in can feel like
a breath of fresh air.

Chest openers are postures that nourish and express the heart chakra.  Camel
pose, half moon, back bends and side bends all bring energy to the heart chakra.
When one is going through a difficult time, these poses can feel impossible, as
if opening up one's heart would cause it to simply crumble.

The heart chakra represents positive intention towards the self and to others.
It cannot be over-active.  Negative behaviours associated with mis-expressed
love are actually over-expression of other chakras.  Being overly possessive of
loved ones is an over-expression of the third chakra.  Being overly lustful or
attached is an over-expression of the second chakra.  There is never too much
positive intention.

When one's heart chakra is under-active, the body starts to shut down.  Lack of
self love leads to anxiety, depression, inability to connect with others.

The heart chakra is the centre of the subtle body.

### Throat

The throat chakra is our voice.  Its element is sound.

This is the artist's chakra.  It governs our expression.  Through it, we express
ourselves to the world around us.  We bare our selves for others to see.  The
throat is a relatively exposed area of the body, with no skull or rib cage
to protect it, which is not unlike how expressing our thoughts, beliefs, and
feelings makes us vulnerable.

When the throat chakra is under active, something is preventing us from saying
what we wish to say.  We might feel unheard.  This carries into modern language;
we say we have a 'lump in our throat' if we can't quite speak because we're
nervous.

### Third Eye

The third eye is located between the eyes, just above the eyebrows.  It is
associated with the pineal gland.  It represents the connection to the
subconscious and the subtle body.  It can be cultivated through meditation.

In corpse pose, or any relaxed seated or lying position, try to release any
tension between the eyes.  The temples start to relax, and thoughts start to
settle.  By clearing our minds, we become more ready to engage with others and
listen, empathize, and relate, without distorting it through our own
preconceptions.

It is impossible to work on one's third eye without a solid footing on the
ground (first chakra) or one would float away, so invested in the beyond that
they are no longer connected to their own bodies and environment.

### Crown

The crown chakra is located at the top of the head.  It represents our
connection to the world at large, and the cosmos.  This differs from connection
to other individuals, as we might explore with the heart chakra.

## The tree of life

Each chakra builds upon the one before it.  Having taken care of our survival,
we become free to feel pleasure.  Pleasure gives us passion, which fuels our
drive and motivation.  Having stable lower (inward) chakras is essential to
support the function of the upper (outward) chakras.  The up/down path the
chakras make is called the sushumana.

As you may have noticed, the lower chakras have to do with how we take care of
our selves and the upper chakras have to do with how we interact with others.
At the centre is the heart.

## In Closing

My study of chakras has allowed me to tune in better to areas that need more
attention.  It's taught me to better listen to what I need to thrive, rather
than stride towards my goals single mindedly.  It's teaching me to cultivate
more energy by removing blockages rather than always trying to do more and work
harder.  May this writing bring you peace.

## Sources

The Wheels of Life by Anodea Judith
Yoga of the Subtle Body by Tias Little
