---
layout: post
title:  "Chakras"
date:   July 26, 2019
---

# Introduction

Chakras are energy centres with the body.  Each chakra is associated with a part
of the physical body, but they lie within the subtle body.  The subtle body is
not the physical body; in place of the physical components of the body, the
subtle body is concerned with energy centres and energy flow.

Each chakra has an associated colour and element.  No chakra is inherently
positive or negative, but each may be either under or overly active.  When that
happens, it manifests as lacking or negative qualities.  The chakras are all
connected to each other, either supporting and drawing support in a system or
cutting off from and draining one another.  It is my belief that balancing them
will lead to a more fulfilled life.

There are many similarities between chakras and the planets of astrology.  It is
my view that there are universal common ground of understanding across cultures,
and that it is partially encoded in such systems.

# The 7 Chakras

## Root

The root chakra is all about survival.  Do you have the basic needs: food, water
shelter?  Beyond that, it is about security.  Do you know that you will have
these needs fulfilled tomorrow?  Are you grounded?

The element of the root chakra is Earth.  In asanas (yoga postures), the root
chakra through your connection to the ground.  This is emphasized in standing
postures, however it is present in all connections to the ground such as: the
sit bones in a seated posture, the base of the skull in corpse pose, through the
hands in inverted postures.  One may feel energy flowing down into the ground,
letting go of tension through that connection.  In activating one's limbs
against gravity, the body rises up.

One who has an under-active root chakra may seem removed from daily life, to
live in their own head, to be flighty.  One who has an overly active root chakra
may be too rigid in material matters, unable to be flexible.

## Sacral

The sacral chakra has to do with pleasure and sensation.  When eating, do you
really taste food?  Do you feel connected to the sensations of pleasure, or are
you just going through the motions?

The element of the sacral chakra is water.  Imagine a soothing stream of water,
or a comfortable bath.

One may under or over indulge.  A life without pleasure quickly loses spark.
Over indulgence no longer feels good.

## Solar Plexus

The solar plexus chakra is our drive.  Its element is fire.  It is what gives us
the will to make our mark in the world, our determination.

One with an under-active solar plexus may doubt themselves out of pursuing their
dreams, not having the confidence to start.  They may not speak up or stand up
for what the believe.  One with an over-active solar plexus chakra tends to use
their domination to subject others to their will.  A well balanced solar plexus
serves everyone well, but leaders especially need to temper their will between
driving what they believe in and leading with compassion rather than force.

Postures that activate the solar plexus include the warrior poses.  They require
the core to be highly engaged, a level headed focus, and breath.  To engage the
core while maintaining a clear mind is much like how a leader must act swiftly
and decisively while remaining calm.
 
## Heart

The heart chakra is our centre.  Its element is air.

When ones heart chakra is blocked it feels suffocating.  People can be smothered
by well intentioned loved ones.  When you make true connections in can feel like
a breath of fresh air.

Chest openers are postures that nourish and express the heart chakra.  Camel
pose, half moon, back bends and side bends all bring energy to the heart chakra.
When one is going through a difficult time, these poses can feel impossible, as
if opening up one's heart would cause it to simply crumble.

The heart chakra represents positive intention.

## Throat

The throat chakra is our voice.

## Third Eye

## Crown

# The tree of life

# The spiral
