---
layout: post
title:  "Books"
date:   January 18. 2020
---

Books I read in 2019
--------------------

Mistakes to Run With by Yasuko Thanh

Recommended to my by a good friend, this is a memoir of a straight-A student
turned sex worker turned writer and mother.  She shares her story deeply,
offering no answers but a stark solidarity for all who are struggling to find
themselves.

Never Mind by Edward St Aubyn

This is the first of the Patrick Melrose novels, now a TV mini-series starring
Benedict Cumberbatch.  In this semi-autobiographical novel series, St Aubyn
explores the experience of suffering traumatic narcissism via an abusive father
and a neglectful mother, and eventually working towards healing from it.

The Gifts of Imperfection by Brené Brown

Also recommended to me, this book is by Brené Brown, shame reseacher and speaker
in one of the most watched TED Talks.  She explores how shame and our societal
avoidance of the topic prevents us from being vulnerable and forging deep
connections with one another.

The Alchemist by Paul Coelho

Following reading *The Gifts of Imperfection," I read The Alchemist.  Brené
Brown mentioned it, so I decided to pick it up.  It's a novel studied in some
high school classes across Canada, about a boy who goes on a quest to fulfill
his Personal Legend.  I found the themes really inspiring, and the story told in
a very simple and direct manner, as if the author distilled his story to its
most fundamental components.  I felt a sense of urgency, that the author really
had an important story to share with the world.

Becoming by Michelle Obama

This memoir by Michelle Obama is a powerful, human story.  She tells her story
strong and true, and sheds a light on racial tensions, prejudice, and systemic
disadvantage in a way that incites not anger and outrage, but compassion,
empathy, and the desire to make things right in the world.

Books I read in 2018
--------------------

Le Petit Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
Wheels of Life by Anodea Judith
Rome's Last Citizen by Jimmy Soni
Never Split the Difference by Chris Voss
Animal Farm by George Orwell
The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg
