---
layout: post
title:  "On Cleaning"
date:   April 28, 2021
---

> Tidying is the act of confronting yourself; cleaning is the act of confronting nature.
>
> --Marie Kondo, Spark Joy: An Illustrated Master Class on the Art of Organizing and Tidying Up

This year I am doing my very first spring cleaning.  Having confronted my
posessions (mostly) last year by (mostly) completing my own tidying festival, I
actually feel far more compelled to keep things clean and it also feels much
easier to do so.  Besides having far less clutter in the way, I have far less
shame about having possessions that I no longer use.

I had always felt a deep shame when I saw that things I own became dusty,
splattered, plain old dirty over time.  Seeing that, I feel, "how could I let
this happen, I must not have cared for it enough."  Growing up I remember
promising my mother that I'd cherish and take care of the things I was asking
her to buy for me.  I saw the process of things gathering dust over time,
accumulating grime over time as something I could negate through sheer
willpower, not to mention that I had never had a habit of regularly cleaning.
When I did clean, I felt such strong disgust.  I would think, "I'll never let
this happen again."  I never adopted the idea that dust happens, dirt happens,
it's part of life.  And we remove it.  And it happens, and we remove it.

The first time that I see something new accumulate some dirt, I think "Well,
that's it.  It'll never be perfectly clean ever again."  What I'm learning is
that--well I'm learning several things but I digress; I'm learning that some
things are actually not too hard to get clean as new again.  Second, things
don't have to get clean all the way like new, they can just get clean and I can
always restore to that level of cleanliness at any point in time.  Third,
cleaning is about defining my desired level of cleanliness and executing it.
Until I own that, I will always be feeling like my home is not clean "enough"
because I'm measuring by an ideal standard, an external one instead of an
internal one.

I always feel amazed by the act of restoring something to a perfectly clean
state.  I never think it's possible and certainly not as easy as it sometimes
really is.  I often think, "well, when I move to my next home, that'll at least
start clean.  I'll just have to live with this until I leave this home."  While
there may always be a next home, a next day, a next life, by choosing that I'm
missing this home, this day, and this life.  Often I don't really choose to do
nothing, I'm compelled to do nothing because I think that doing anything is
impossible.

I felt really impacted by the second part of this quotation even though the
KonMari Method is focused on the first.  I simply did not accept that it's
natural for things to become dirty through regular use.  I always thought, "you
have to use things in such a way that they never become dirty," like the kind of
people who leave the protective film on everything.  The thing is though, you
never get to enjoy the actual thing itself without that layer of protection.
You live your life prioritizing the avoidance of getting anything dirty over
actually enjoying your space and belongings.

Spring cleaning has been an act of confronting every part of my home, caring for
it, and coming to peace with it.
