---
layout: post
title:  "On Thought"
date:   Dec 17, 2021
---

One of the practices of mindfulness meditation is the following: to observe
thoughts without engaging with them.  This practice is also known as 'noting'.
To perform this practice, one simple notes that a particular thought has arisen
and continues to observe the mind for the next thought.

Some period into practicing this noting meditation it occured to me that
thoughts simply appear without my doing anything about it.  Certainly I can
direct my mind to think about certain topics when I want to, but in this
situation I'm not directing my mind to think about anything at all but there
they are; thoughts.  This realization that thoughts appear spontaneously and
without my input prompts me to wonder: where do they come from?  What causes
them?  Who is thinking these thoughts if not me?  Why these thoughts?

In yogic theory there is a concept of "latent impressions" called _samskaras_
in Sanskrit.  It is the concept that as one goes through their life, events and
reactions to events leave impressions in the mind.  These impressions can be
activated later on, causing thoughts and actions based on those thoughts.  When
we become aware that perhaps we are reacting to an image of the past, then we
can choose to look more clearly at the present situation and choose to act
differently.  In this way, samkaras dissipate.

Modern neuroscience tells us succintly that "neurons that fire together, wire
together."  Our minds and thought patterns are creatures of habit.  We can
influence our stream of spontaneous thought by choosing to think the kinds of
thoughts we'd like to have come to us unbidden when we are actively using our
minds.

The mind is essentially constantly in a state of motion.  Yoga is the practice
of yoking or restraining the mind, and one of the tenets of yoga is that the
cessation of the swirling of mind-stuffs precedes the capacity to experience
reality as it is.  Left to its own devices, the mind is essentially constantly
spewing out something.  Viewing the mind this way, it's not so much a question
of why I'm having thoughts without actively thinking but rather that this is
the normal state of things-- I've just never noticed until I sat down and
observed my mind.

Our bodies perform numerous functions autonomously; perhaps it ought not to be
so suprising to consider that the mind does too.

With practice, one can quiet the mind so that it spews fewer spontaneous
thoughts around.  Another interesting result from observing the mind is seeing
how many thoughts the mind insists are true but are fairly easily to
demonstrate are false.

More profound than the realization that I am not entirely in control of my
thoughts is the realization that the being that is aware of thought is separate
from thought and the source of thought.
