---
layout: post
title:  "On Ego"
date:   June 4, 2021
---

A lot of spiritual aspirants at some point on their journey try to 'transcend
the ego,' an idea I'd like to explore and challenge.  I'd argue that the ego is
necessary to make sense of our worldly experience.  While one may find bliss in
moments of transcending the ego, the ego remains an essential part of worldly
being.

First, what purpose does the ego serve?  The ego is the lens through which we
interpret the world.  It helps us navigate the world through a coherent
identity; the 'I' in 'I' statements.  I think of the ego as the mental analogue
for the physical body; so the body is on the physical plane, the ego is on the
mental plane.  Having an ego allows us to form a coherent story out of all our
experiences.

The ego serves to differentiate what 'I' experience from the rest of the world,
or what is not 'I'.  This, many would say, is an illusion.  That we are separate
is an illusion, that truly, there is no boundary between 'you' and 'I'.  This is
something one might experience for themselves in deep meditation, or at a music
festival, or in a flow state.  The boundaries of the ego soften.

The troubles with ego start when we start identifying ourselves with our ego,
treating the ego as one and the same as our entire being.  If, for example, we
identify with our job title but that becomes threatened, then it can feel as if
our existence is threatened.  In this case, attachment to the ego causes
suffering.  Being consumed by the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain
is another pitfall of attachment to the ego.  In short, forgetting that you are
more than your ego (just as you are more than your body) is an ignorance that
causes suffering.

I think one of the most valuable things to come from having an ego is an
individual lived experience.  Our experiences give us the capacity to empathize
with others.  Our uniqueness allows us to appreciate that everyone else also has
a uniqueness.  If we experienced life as a general bliss, we would lose all the
beautiful and transient idiosyncrasies of individual personality.  Ego, then is
an essential part of the lived experience and not necessarily something to
overcome.
