---
layout: post
title:  "Gratitude is Optional"
date:   Jul 28, 2022
---

# Gratitude is Optional

Gratitude is a big word these days, with gratitude journals, and gratitude
practices.  It strikes me hearing the phrase "Of course I'm grateful,"
especially once someone else has expressed their gratitude.  It becomes
something we perhaps feel ashamed of not feeling or expressing because then
perhaps we are no longer deserving of the thing we have received.  But we might
not always feel grateful even when we think we should, and that's okay.

First off, gratitude is a feeling.  To me, the word "gratitude" means "feeling
fortunate for having received something."  It differs from feelings of
accomplishment for example, where something is earned or clearly deserved.  Or
it differs from transactional exchanges, where one thing is exchanged for
another and there is no gifting and receiving.  In each of these scenarios there
is still room for gratitude for the opportunities that have come our way that
allowed us for example, to put in our own efforts to accomplish something.

When someone gives a gift freely, there is no expectation of immediate
reciprocity, including an expression of gratitude.  We may feel moved by
gratitude and choose to express that gratitude, which in itself becomes a gift
to the giver.  But by no means is that gratitude mandatory.

Sometimes, we fail to see the gifts that surround us as gifts.  That is the
point of a gratitude practice; to shift our perspective to see the things that
we may take for granted; to give ourselves the chance to notice all the things
around us that are freely given.  Lift itself is a gift.  The life supporting
rays of the sun, the life giving air and water, and the life supporting Earth.
The warm energy of friends, and family, and strangers.  Gratitude is a powerful
antidote to today's pervasive self-starting, self-sufficient views that induce
so much self-criticism and self-loathing.

Gratitude is a feeling, and we can't make ourselves feel a feeling.  We can
recognize how we feel, cultivate and express feelings, and shift our environment
or perspective to be more conducive to a feeling.  Looking for places where we
can find gratitude is a good thing.  But it takes practice, and if there's no
gratitude to be found, that's okay.
