---
layout: post
title:  "50 First Dates, A Rapunzel Story"
date:   Nov 6, 2023
---

Fairy tales are archetypal stories in which we encode and pass down our
collective understanding of the development of the human psyche.  Adam Sandler
and Drew Barrymore's '50 First Dates' is a modern iteration of 'Rapunzel' from
the Brothers Grimm, the story of a maiden locked in a tower.  Like Rapunzel,
Barrymore's Lucy finds her way forward through sacred union with the King's Son,
Sandler's Henry.

Where Rapunzel is locked in a tower, Lucy Whitmore is trapped in a never ending
repeated day.  Since her accident, her Father replicates for her the same day,
October 13 with the assistance of his son, Lucy's brother.  Like Rapunzel, the
condition for Lucy being trapped was caused inadvertently by her Father, who was
driving at the time of the accident.  Contrast Rapunzel's father who, focused on
acquiring the lettuce his wife desired, promised the yet unborn child to the
Witch.  Interestingly, Whitmore and her father were driving out to acquire a
pineapple, the proverbial forbidden lettuce, for her father's birthday.

This never ending day is akin to Rapunzel's stone tower; in it, Lucy is
oblivious to her own entrapment.  Lucy's father replicates this day to protect
her rather than have her face the trauma of her condition anew daily with no
hope of recovery or integration.  His actions keep Lucy sealed in a bubble away
from the rest of society.  Though she moves about freely, driving each day to
Hukilau Cafe, speaking with Sue, she cannot truly be in communication with
anyone.  She repeats the same compliment to Sue's 'new' haircut daily, who
smiles in reply through restrained sadness.

Sandler's Henry, like the King's Son, breaks into the tower.  At first he visits
each day, each time introducing himself anew as the King's Son visited Rapunzel
nightly calling 'Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair.'  Like Rapunzel and the
King's Son formed a plan tying silk scarves into a rope, Henry linked Lucy's
fragmented memories together in videotapes.  Their plan was working, right until
Lucy awoke to a 'stranger' Henry beside her, and realized it could not be.
Rapunzel foiled their plan on the eve of the night they were to steal away,
revealing the King's Son to the Witch by accident.  The Witch, enraged, banished
Rapunzel to isolation in the desert.  Lucy, not wanting to be a burden, admitted
herself in the mental institution.  There, in a period of isolation, a maturing
gestated.  Rapunzel had given birth in isolation to twins, a boy and a girl.
Lucy drew out of her unconscious images of Henry, in this period where she no
longer had to depend on her father and brother to insulate her from her trauma.
Finally, upon hearing Rapunzel's voice that he knew from her beautiful singing,
the blind Prince found Rapunzel again and his eyesight was healed.  Lucy's
Father gave to Henry a CD, to let him know that Lucy was singing again, which
she only did when she saw him.  Matured, the Prince returned with Rapunzel and
their children to his Kingdom where he was received with joy.  Like him, Henry
too matured.

50 First Dates is a reincarnation of Rapunzel.  By breaking into her tower,
Henry pulled Lucy forward into a life that was full despite her memory
condition.  Henry chose to see her condition as something that could be
celebrated even it did also have to be managed.  That transmutation through
union is what is symbolized by the twins in Rapunzel and indeed is at the very
heart of timeless stories we call 'fairy tales'.
