---
layout: post
title:  "Weapons in Literature: Symbols of the Hero's Journey"
date:   Jan 18, 2023
---

# Weapons in Literature: Symbols of the Hero's Journey

## Preface

I've always loved fantasy stories.  Magic, forests, mountains.  Symbols,
talismans, including special weapons.  My favourite part was always when the
hero, lifted out of his ordinary world and into the magical, is training up and
mastering skills.  Not the most exciting part really, but it was to me.  It's
the part before the danger, when there are still mentors, and a clear path to
mastering new skills.  But that's not the Hero's path.  The Hero's path is to
face the unknown, do what's never been done, that which only they can, and must,
do.  It wouldn't be much of a story if Harry Potter went to Hogwarts, stayed in
school, and maybe followed Dumbledore into battle against Voldemort.  Perhaps
that's why I've always kept coming back to these stories.

## Introduction

Three heroes in three stories: Harry Potter of the Harry Potter series; Eragon
of the Inheritance Cycle; and Aragorn of The Lord of the Rings.  In each of
these stories, our heroes find their way to their weapon but don't necessarily
connect with it at first.  It's only when they change their relationship with
their destiny that the bond is truly forged and our hero fully wields their
weapon in the world.

## Harry Potter

Harry's wand is made of holly, with a phoenix feather core.  The phoenix who
gave the feather for that core gave another, just one other.  And that feather
forms the core of Lord Voldemort's wand.  Harry learns this fact on his first
trip into Diagon Alley, his first steps into the wizarding world.

From the beginning, Harry's fate, inextricably linked with Tom Riddle's is
representing in the wands' twin core relationship.

Harry's wand acts of its own accord several times to save him from mortal peril.
The first time Harry's and Voldemort's wands clash a golden beam forms between
them, from which 'ghosts' of Harry's parents issue forth who then protect him in
a narrow escape.

The series overall places a high degree of emphasis on the bond between witch or
wizard and wand, and rightful command of a wand.  'The wand chooses the wizard,
Harry,' Ollivander tells him on that first visit.  Not only that, spells simple
don't work as well with someone else's wand, as Hermione experiences with
Bellatrix Lestrange's.  This comes into full highlight with the lore around the
Elder Wand, the mythical wand that bests all other wands.  That Voldemort would
desecrate the grave of Harry's closest mentor, Dumbledore, for this wand but
ultimately it was Harry who bested Malfoy as its rightful master, that this
forms a key to the crux of the whole story shows just how much significance is
placed into the symbol of the 'weapon.'

Harry's own, personal, wand is broken in the seventh book.  This book sees Harry
at his most lost.  Loss of loved ones, loss of direction, loss of hope for a
time, and loss of safety.  No plan, no mentor, no wand he had to find his own
way to destroy all the remaining horcruxes and defeat Voldemort.

And he does just that; in the final duel Harry goes in with confidence, without
even his own wand.  He reckons, correctly, that in fact he himself, not
Voldemort, is master of the Elder Wand.  It didn't matter that Harry's own wand
was broken, nor that the Elder wand was in Voldemort's hand.  Harry finally
understood the sacrifice that his mother made for him and who he was as a
wizard.

And in the end, Harry chose very wisely to use the all powerful wand to repair
his own and before casting it away forever.

Of course, this is the story as the author chose to write it.  JK Rowling chose
unquestionably for good to triumph over evil, love over power.  Real life often
doesn't work that way, at least at first glance.  Still, we tell these stories
for a reason.

## Eragon

The Inheritance cycle is a young adult fantasy series, written by Christopher
Paolini.  Paolini draws some criticism for leaning heavily on Tolkien's world
building, but hey, the world of literature is all the more rich for building on
top of what Tolkien wrote.  The story Paolini tells though, is much more coming
of age, less epic.  Less epic in the sense that it's not so much about the
incarnation of the forces of good and evil, rise and fall of kingdoms, closing
of karmic loops that have lasted an age.  It's a much more intimate story, about
a teenage boy who doesn't know who he is or where he comes from, a boy who comes
to know himself (quite literally, Eragon discovers his own True Name on the cusp
of the final battle) and save the world.

Eragon is a Dragon Rider, a once flourishing group formed from a pact between
Dragons, Elves, and Men.  The weapon of a Dragon Rider was a sword, forged by
the Elf Rhunön in the colour of their Dragon's scales.  Over the course of the
story, Eragon first is given the sword of another rider by his mentor, Brom.
This sword is taken back by its rightful owner, the heir of the man who once
owned that sword.  That man was his half-brother, Murtagh.  Bereft of a sword,
and a mentor, and a friend, Eragon receives a prophecy to find the material
needed to forge a new Rider's sword.  He seeks the aid of Rhunön and forges the
sword Brisingr, deep blue, hand-and-a-half hilt, and a Sapphire set in the
pommel.  Eragon named the sword Brisingr, using the first spell, and first word
in the Ancient Language that Brom had ever taught him.

The first sword that Eragon wielded was Zar'Roc, the blade of Morzan.  Morzan
was a Rider who turned on them, and sided instead with Galbatorix, who lead an
insurrection and plunged the kingdom into war and tyranny.  It was given to him
by his mentor Brom, who had defeated Morzan in battle.  Brom taught Eragon sword
fighting, which they first practiced with sticks.  When wooden swords no longer
sufficed, he presented Eragon with Zar'Roc.

Eragon would later go on to meet Murtagh, a young man and rebel.  Unbeknownst to
Eragon, Murtagh was the son of Morzan and his half-brother.  Eragon had never
known his father, and his mother died before he could know her.  Eragon was
raised by his uncle, his mother's brother, as a farm boy.

Although briefly befriended, Murtagh betrayed Eragon.  Murtagh had rebelled
against the tyrant king, Galbatorix, most of his life, but was resigned to
fighting for him.  In a clash with Eragon, he defeated him and took Zar'Roc as
his rightful inheritance.  Murtagh was deeply bitter that their mother, Selena,
had escaped Galbatorix and provided for Eragon a life outside the confines of
Galbatorix's grip.

Now, with Brom dead, Murtagh an enemy, and no sword, Eragon is lost.

Eragon is told a prophecy, and finds under the Menoa tree the special
brightsteel needed to forge a new sword.  Rhunön and Eragon forge the sword
Brisingr together.  During this time, he is also receiving formal tutelage as a
Dragon Rider.

The weapons of a Dragon Rider are not only physical.  They do battle also with
magic.  And to command magic requires mental fortitude and knowledge of the
Ancient Language.  By speaking the Ancient Language and providing the energy to
enact its truth, Riders and other spell casters perform magic.  The Ancient
Language is comprised of the True Names of things, such as fire, light, stone.
All beings have True Names, composed of words in the Ancient Language.

In order to prepare for the final battle with Galbatorix, Eragon must find his
True Name.  Meaning, he must know himself.  He must see himself as he is, not
how he wishes to be nor how he judges himself to be, but how he is.  Eragon
ponders this and finds it.  Sword in hand and in heart, Eragon confronts
Galbatorix and ushers in an age of peace to the land.

The weapons that passed through Eragon's hands symbolized his eponymous
Inheritance.  The unfinished business of his mother's flight from Morzan and the
half-brother left behind, the unfinished business of his father Brom.  In a way,
Brisingr was a reincarnation of Brom's sword, his dragon also being blue and
named Saphira.  Most of all, the weapons symbolized Eragon's coming into himself
and out in the world.

## Aragorn

> Note: There is an abundance of supremacist allegory in The Lord of the Rings.
> Nonetheless, I think Aragorn's journey is a valuable story in fated purpose
> and choosing to live in it rather than run away from it.

Aragorn is the heir to Numenor, a legendary race of Men that have been all but
forgotten.  He is the heir of Isildur, the man who cut the Ring of Power down
from Sauron's hand, ending the Great War of the Second Age.  Isildur however was
enraptured by the Ring and failed to destroy it.  Aragorn carries this failure,
this weakness, as his own.  This causes him to deny his destiny as King of
Gondor, leader of the race of Men.

As a sub-plot in this story, Frodo faces his destiny as the Ring-Bearer.  Though
neither talented nor particularly able, it is his destiny to carry the ring to
Mordor.  Frodo's story mirrors the themes of Aragorn's.  At some point, he
wishes 'the ring had never come to me, and none of this had happened at all,' or
that Bilbo might have slain Gollum so that the Dark Lord had never come to hear
of the Shire.  Similarly, Aragorn spends decades of time wandering the North as
a lone Ranger, as if he could be just another Numenorian man and not the heir to
the throne.  But, he is not.

Aragorn knows this, and he carries with him the shards of Narsil, the sword that
shattered as Isildur cut down the One Ring.  (This is, in my opinion, a major
difference between the books and the movies, where we see the shards being held
in Rivendell, in care of Elrond.)  It's as if to say, he knows his destiny, he
hasn't given up on it, but he wasn't ready either to set it down for good or to
go for it, for real.

The reappearance of the One Ring presents a turning point for Aragorn.  At this
point, he asks Elrond to reforge the sword.  It is renamed Anduril, Flame of the
West.  Aragorn joins the Fellowship of the Ring and begins his quest to reunite
the Kingdom of Men in earnest.

Aragorn is tried repeatedly as he travels across Middle Earth towards the throne
in White City, in Gondor.  Having taken up the sword, he now must live up to the
post and earn the respect and loyalty of men across the kingdom.  He does so in
Rohan, and the battle of Helm's Deep.

Reaching farther back into history, Aragorn is tested again by a pact formed in
the last age.  With  Anduril, Aragorn closes a karmic loop formed in the last
War, where deserters of Dunharrow were cursed to remain ghosts on Middle Earth,
unable to pass into the afterlife.  In fact, it is with Anduril that Aragorn
stakes his claim across Middle Earth as the Return of the King.

It may seem that the most exciting parts of the story are the major battles, and
pulling through them in the nick of time.  Yet it was the alliances formed, the
answers to the rallying cries that were made that won the battle.  It was every
moment that Aragorn leaned into his destiny as he travelled Middle Earth,
finally coming out of the North, out of Rivendell and into the Kingdom of Men.
Across Rohan, through Dunharrow, to Gondor.

## Hero's Journey

The weapon is a symbol for how we show up in the world.  How we assert, how we
interact with and modify the world around us.  The imagery itself is phallic and
this is a masculine archetypal  energy.  The outward 'I do' is paired with the
inward 'I am.'  We've seen in these stories that there is no potency, in other
words there's impotence without integrity.  Without knowing one's self, one
cannot effectively do anything.  The weapon is symbol of this connection to the
outside world.  Our heroes aren't sitting in monasteries mastering their inner
worlds in isolation, they are journeying out in the world and the quality of
their weapons and relationship with that weapon, their ability to wield that
weapon is linked with the parallel inner journey.

It should be noted that although this piece is about an archetypal masculine
quality, self assertion, it applies equally to human beings across the gender
spectrum.

## Conclusion

The study of myth has always fascinated me, and I've not always understood why.
I've come to appreciate myth and fairytale as the cultural inheritance belonging
to all, born from the journey of the human psyche and self-image through the
ages.  Though the incarnations may evolve, the symbols are eternal.
